
So how many PV cells do I need in my panels, anyway?  by
Richard Perez

Solar modules are made with between 32 and 44 series cells for 12 
Volt use.  How many cells are enough?  How many are too much?  What 
is the optimum number of cells to put in a panel for 12 Volt use?  
Well, as usual, it depends on our specific application.

The Single PV Cell
In order to understand why there are differing numbers of PV cells 
in modules, let's first examine the single cell.  This little marvel 
converts light directly into DC electricity.  It does this job within 
very specific limits.  These limits are, according to the quantum 
mechanics among us, built into the structure of our Universe.  The 
limits of the single PV cell determine the operation of the collection 
of cells we call a module or panel.

The electrical power generated by the PV cell has two components:  
voltage (E) and current (I).  The output power (Watts or P) that 
the cell produces is the product of cell's output current times its 
output voltage.  P=IE.  The voltage output of the PV remains fairly 
constant over a wide range of input lighting, just as long as there 
is some light.  The current, however, varies in direct proportion 
to the amount of light entering the PV cell.  The more light entering 
the cell, the more current it produces.  The cell's voltage remains 
the same from dim to bright lighting.

For the purposes of discussion here, consider a 100mm X 100mm (4 
in. by
4 in.) multicrystal silicon PV cell.  Monocrystal or amorphous silicon 
cells will differ slightly.  The absolute value of the voltage information 
will differ, but the general performance trends remain the same for 
all types of silicon PV cells.  This example cell is rated using 
the standard AM 1.5 Solar Input of 100 milliWatts per square centimeter, 
about the amount of sunshine you receive on a sunny noontime.

PV Cell Voltage
This multicrystal silicon solar cell has an open circuit voltage 
of about 0.57 Volts at 25¡C.  Open circuit voltage means that the 
cell is not connected to any load and is not moving any current.  
Under load, the output voltage of the individual cell drops to 0.46 
Volts at 25¡C.  It will remain around this 0.46 V level regardless 
on the sun's intensity or the amount of current the cell produces.  
This decrease in voltage is caused by resistance losses within the 
cell's structure and the metallic conductors deposited on the cell's 
surfaces.

Temperature affects the PV's cell's voltage.  The higher the temperature 
is, the lower the cell's output voltage becomes.  The PV cell's output 
voltage falls about 5% for every 25¡C. increase over 25¡C.

PV Cell Current
While the voltage of a PV cell is very reliable, its current output 
is one big, fat variable.  The cell's current depends on how intense 
the light is, and most importantly for this discussion, the voltage 
difference between the cell (or collection of cells) and the load 
(in most cases a battery).

Under operating conditions this cell is rated at 2.87 Amperes of 
current by its manufacturer.  I have measured the current output 
of this type of cell at 4.2 Amperes on a very cold, very clear, very 
bright & very snowy Winter's noon.  Altitude is a factor that affects 
the cell's output current.  The Earth's atmosphere is absorbs sunlight.  
The higher you are, the less atmosphere there is above you, and the 
more sunlight you receive.  Expect to see current gains of about 
5% for every 5,000 feet above sea level.

Cells into Modules
When PV cells are assembled into modules they are wired in series.  
The positive pole of the one cell is connected to the negative pole 
of the next cell, and so on until all the cells in the module are 
connected in a series string.  This series wiring is done to raise 
the voltage of the module.  A single cell has a voltage potential 
of 0.46 Volts.  This is not enough voltage to do any usable work 
in a 12 Volt system.  But if we add the Voltage of say 36 cells by 
series wiring them, then we have a working voltage 16.7 Volts, and 
that's enough to charge a 12 Volt battery.

The operational voltage range of a lead acid battery is between 11.6 
and 16 volts.  The battery's exact voltage depends on state of charge, 
temperature, and whether the battery is being charged or discharged 
at
the time.  It is this battery voltage curve that the modules are 
designed to fit.  After losses in the blocking diode and the wiring 
are subtracted, the module MUST provide greater voltage than the 
battery possesses.  If PV module cannot do this, then it cannot transfer 
electrons to the battery.  It cannot recharge the battery.

The current produced by the module remains the same as the current 
produced by a single cell, about 3 Amperes.  The series wiring technique 
causes the voltages to be added, but the current remains the same.  
We could parallel connect the 36 cells.  This would add their currents 
rather than their voltages.  The result would be a module that produces 
108 Amperes, but at only 0.46 Volts.  Hardly a useful item.

So How Many Cells?
PV module manufacturers make 12 Volt modules with 32, 36, or 44 cells
in the series string.  They are all rated at about the same current, 
being composed of the same basic cell.  The difference between these 
modules is one of voltage.  The question for us to answer is how 
their output voltages relate to the voltages we require for our system.

32 Cells in Series
This module has the lowest voltage rating of 14.7 Volts (0.46 Volts 
times 32 cells).  This is because it has the fewest cells in its 
series string.  This module is designed to very closely follow the 
charge curve of a 12
Volt lead acid battery.  As the battery fills, its voltage climbs.  
When this battery is almost full its voltage is around 15 volts.  
The 32 cell module simply hasn't enough voltage to continue recharging 
the battery when its full.  These 32 cell modules are commonly called 
"self regulating" because they lack the voltage to overcharge the 
average, small, lead acid battery.

The applications suitable for the 32 cell module are RVs, boats, 
and summer cabins.  These applications are characterized by intermittent 
use and relatively small battery capacity.  In these applications, 
the 32 cell module can be used without a regulator and the batteries 
will not be overcharged during periods of disuse.

36 Cells in Series
This module has an output voltage of 16.7 Volts (0.46 times 36 cells).  
This is enough voltage to continue to charge a lead acid battery 
even though it may be fully recharged.  The 36 cell module is the 
workhorse of the Home Power user.  It is most suitable for 12 Volt 
AE systems with battery capacities over 350 Ampere-hours.  It has 
the higher output voltage necessary to recharge high antimony, deep 
cycle, lead acid batteries.

It does, however, require regulation in many cases to prevent overcharging 
the battery during periods of disuse.  This type of module needs 
regulation in systems where the total current generated by the PVs 
is greater than a C/20 rate to the battery.  For example, a 350 Ampere-hour 
battery has a C/20 rate of 17.5 Amperes (350 Ampere-hours/20 hours).  
At 3 Amperes
per module, the 350 Ampere-hour battery will not require regulation 
until there are 6 modules within the system.  This is true only if 
the system is in constant use.  If a system is unused for days at 
time, then regulation should be added if the 36 cell modules can 
produce a C/50 rate or more to the battery.

The 36 cell module is more cost effective in Home Power applications 
because of its higher current at higher voltages and temperatures.  
The higher voltage of 36 series wired cells more effectively recharges 
the large lead acid batteries.  Higher temperatures cause the voltage 
of any module to drop.  The 36 cell module has enough voltage surplus 
to still be effective at higher temperatures, like on a hot Summer's 
afternoon.

44 Cells in Series
The modules are the hot rods of the PV industry.  44 cells in series 
yields a working output voltage of 20.3 volts.  These modules do 
not diminish in current output into a 12 Volt system, regardless 
of battery's voltage or high module temperature.  They WILL REQUIRE 
REGULATION in just about every application.  They have the voltage 
to raise the system's voltage, while charging full batteries, to 
well over 16 volts.  This is high enough to make any equipment on 
line (like an inverter) very unhappy.  Over voltage can ruin electronic 
equipment.

The 44 cell modules have very specific applications.  They are designed 
for systems that must accept voltage losses in transferring the PV 
energy to its destination.  Consider a low voltage pump located some 
300 feet down a well.  The electricity that powers this pump must 
travel 300 feet down the well to the pump and 300 feet back up again.  
This 600 foot long wire run will have appreciable voltage losses 
even if monster big wire (like 0 or 00 gauge) is used.  In order 
to deliver acceptable voltage levels at the pump we can increase 
the voltage of the module and just eat the losses in the wire.  The 
44 cell module, with its 20.3 Volt operating level can stand a loss 
of over 6 Volts and still be effective at the pump.  A word to the 
wise here.  The cost of additional cells within the module is far 
greater than heavy copper wire.  Be sure that it's not cheaper to 
use big wire in your application before you decide on the 44 cell 
module to solve voltage loss problems.

Another side benefit of the 44 cell module is its response in high 
temperatures and very low levels of light.  We ran two modules, each 
using the same cells, side by side for comparison.  The only difference 
between the modules was one had 36 cells in series, the other 44.  
The 44 cell module consistently produced more useable power in three 
situations:
1)	The system voltage was above 15 volts, 2) the ambient temperature
was very hot (over 40¡C.), & 3) the ambient light was very dim (in 
fog or on overcast days).  We tabulated the results and compared 
performance with price and the 36 cell module was more cost effective.  
Even though the 44 cell module performed better, this increase in 
performance was not enough to offset its higher price.  If you live 
in a very hot area, then the additional voltage of the 44 cell module 
may indeed pay for itself.

In A Nutshell
The 32 cell module is for small and often unused 12 volt systems.  
Its big
advantage is it doesn't need a regulator.

The 36 cell module is best for most Home Power systems.  It supplies 
the most cost effective energy to 12 volt systems using lead acid 
batteries.

The 44 cell module is suited to 12 volt systems with voltage loss 
problems.  Its advantages are higher output voltage and strong performance 
in very hot locations.
